The Monkey And Groundnuts (English)
Once upon a time, a child was born in the Chief’s palace.The child was so beautiful that everyone admired her. As she grew up, the number of suitors who wanted her hand in marriage was countless. However, each time a potential suitor showed up, the father would turn him away.  

“Father, I want to get married. I am old enough!” The daughter begged. 

“So far, there hasn’t been any man fit  to marry you. Once the man destined to marry you shows up, you will know,” replied her father. 

“Ah! How will I know?” the daughter asked. 

“Father, all my friends of my age  have children and I have none.  This is not right. You are being unfair to me” she protested. 

The father said to her, “You are not yet grown up, you should wait.”

And so the young lady stayed  a spinster for many years. One  day, a monkey decided to make an attempt at marrying the Chief’s daughter. The monkey came down from a tree in a thick forest. He groomed himself and looked the perfect gentleman, to ask for the Chief’s daughter’s hand in marriage. When the Chief saw him, he said, “The one who is coming has so much confidence.”  

The suitor knocked on the door and announced his arrival respectfully: “Otini mukwai”. “Come in,” the Chief answered enthusiastically. 

The suitor was given a warm welcome.“Sir,” he began, “I thought of coming over to the palace to see the woman people have been talking about.”

“The woman you are talking about is right in front of you”  the chief assured him. 

The messenger was asked to call her mother. She went in and found out  that the suitor was a monkey.  He was very reserved.  “Is this the man who intends to marry my daughter?” she asked in shock.  

Her daughter was equally perturbed. “Is this the man I will marry?” she asked in disbelief.

“Yes, this is the man we have come to like,” her father replied.   

“But I do not want this man,” his daughter protested.   

The father said, “How can you refuse?  We have decided. You will get married to this man.”   

“I am sorry, but I do not want to get married to this man.”     

“It has to be this man only” her father insisted.   

They got hold of her and beat her. Although they insisted that she marry the suitor, the daughter continued to protest against the arrangement. The mother- started preparing food for the suitor while her daughter flatly refused to give in.   

When she had calmed down, they persuaded her to give in and accept the marriage.  

“This is the appropriate man, just see how he is dressed,” they said. At last, the  woman gave in and agreed to get married to the new suitor.  

When the marriage ceremony was over, his mother-in-law asked him to accompany her so that she could show him the field which she wanted him to prepare for her.     

“Could you please prepare this field so that we can plant some crops and some groundnuts?” she asked politely.   

The  new husband finished preparing the field in no time.  

The mother-in-law planted the ground nuts and other crops. When she finished planting one section, she moved on to the next. As she did so, the son- in-law went to the planted sections to ensure that the planting was done properly. Strangely, he started to remove and eat the nuts.  

When he returned home, he complained of fatigue. “I am so tired. I found guinea fowls in the field. I doubt if there will be any ground nuts in the field. However, the other seeds should still be there,” he reported.   
 
The following morning, the mother- in-law went to the field and found that all the groundnut seeds had been removed.   “Aaha! Where are we going to get more groundnut seeds since each time we plant them, they are eaten, where are we going to get them from?” she lamented.   

In the meantime, the son-in-law was feeding on the same groundnut seeds. 

All the groundnuts she had planted were eaten up by her son-in-law.  

When the groundnuts were completely finished, the mother-in-law resolved not to buy any more for planting,  believing that even if she did so, they would also be eaten.   

After a period of time in marriage, the wife became pregnant. Later she gave birth. Her mother told her daughter to ask the husband whether they should go and visit the wife’s mother-in-law.    

“Yes mother. That idea is  good ,” she said in agreement.    She went and put the proposition to her husband who agreed to take her to his mother.

His mother-in-law prepared  what was necessary for their journey. She even arranged that they take a live chicken with them.   

“Go, my daughter.”  

They started off on a journey to visit the in- laws. When they reached the in- laws’ place, the wife was met with surprises.    

He said, “This is where I come from, in the grove.”  

“Aaha! So this is my in-laws’ place? I am married here?”  The woman got more confused as she saw more and more monkeys doing all kinds of antics while in the trees. The husband also joined in.   

Now the wife said, “How shall I go back?  I had refused to be married to this man.  Now see the result of my parents insistence.  I totally refused to get married to him. Now here, how will I find my way back home?” she lamented to herself.     

The following day, a hunter with dogs went into the bush.  The dogs sniffed the smell of monkeys and started barking until they had located them.   The hunter went closer and found the woman in tears among the monkeys.   


“Aaha, what is it?” he asked.    “Listen, I will tell you how we got here” she began.  She explained all the details to him.   “So this is how you travelled to this place?” he asked.  “Yes!” the woman said. “Let me tell you the whole story,” and she began to narrate it to him.  “Ooho! That was too bad,” said the hunter  sympathetically.  “Now that you are in my hands, point out the route so that I can take you back,” the man offered.   

The woman showed the hunter the route and soon they were home at her parents’ home.

“What is it, our daughter?” her parents asked.   

“Listen to what happened where we went”. She narrated everything that had happened. “Had it not been for the hunter who has brought me back here, I would have died there,” she concluded.        

Respectfully, that is how the tale ended.

