The Chief’s Children & A Fool (English)
Once upon a time, a chief presided over a large chiefdom.  In a chiefdom, as it is everywhere, there are some upright people and some useless ones. In this particular chiefdom, there were the Chief’s  and a stupid child. The Chief’s children and the stupid child decided that the following day, they would go into the bush to pick up some wild fruit called amasuku.  That night, they all slept in one house.

In the morning, they all went into the bush for the fruit. Each time they found amasuku, they picked them up. While  doing this, the stupid child wandered off in  another direction. Then, as she was walking by, she saw a very nice, small tree. She decided that she would take it with her. 

In another section of the bush, all the children of the Chief were picking the fruit.  They would call her and she would answer from another area.   

“Yaa, this one with her stupidity, today she may be lost, she may not be found.  It is like she is very far” they said. They tried calling her again but  she did not answer. 

Meanwhile, the stupid child looked at the small tree again and assured herself that it was very nice.

After some time, the Chief’s children found the stupid child with a small tree. It had a lot of money on it.

They said to themselves, “Can this stupid child own this tree? We shall get it from her whether she likes it or not.”

They got the tree from her, and all the money it bore  disappeared. They did not even know where the money had gone to.

“Is this what this small tree has started doing? This is wrong,” they wondered. “Let us first return it to her and see what she will do”

They gave it back to her. 

Again, the tree got back all the money. 

“Aaha, this is really bad!” they said in astonishment,. The girls decided to go back home. “What shall we do, as we are now nearing the village?  When we arrive in the village, it  will not be pleasant, because the people will  say the owner of this tree is this stupid child, so in these circumstances let us beat her up,” they suggested. 

They got hold of her and beat her up.  Ironically, the small tree was still in the stupid child’s possession.  They arrived back in the village. 

“What has happened?”  the Chief asked.

“Where we went, we came across this small tree, but this stupid child wants to grab it from us!”  they answered.

“No she will not get it from you,” the Chief replied. “So, messenger, make an announcement in the village  that all the villagers must gather here, and we shall determine the owner of this small tree,” the Chief assured them.

The messenger made the announcement and all the people gathered at the palace.  “So, you, the stupid child, how did you come to be in possession of this tree? How did you find  it?”

The stupid child  explained.

“And you girls, how was it?” 

The other children also explained.    

Then the Chief  said, “Yaa!  Know what you shall do.” 

The girls tried to make the tree respond to them but they failed. "Stupid child", they cried, “let us know how it was when you saw the tree.”

She started singing the following song:   

My small tree, my small tree, which I saw alone,
my small tree; my small tree,
my small tree,which I saw alone,
my small tree.  My small tree,
who plants 'lubumba, lubumba’
and goes to the chief;
my small tree,
who plants ‘lubumba, lubumba’
And goes to the chief. 

The small tree jumped about and produced a lot of money .  

“So the owner of this small tree  is this stupid child, it is not your tree,” the Chief concluded.

That is how I heard the tale.

