Once upon a time,  a certain man lived in a hut.  His name was Chomba Nsangwa.  This man used to smoke a lot of dagga.

One day, his son asked, “Father, what do you smoke every day?”  He answered, “It’s dagga.You will also be smoking this way when I die.  Don’t you see that I live alone in the bush?”

Then the man said to his son, “Let me go and show you where I have planted dagga!” When they arrived there, he found the dagga had been damaged by animals.  He became very annoyed and said, “If I had an axe, I would follow these animals and chop them to death. Let me go to the village and ask for an axe.” 

Carrying his fish with him, he started off for the village.  When he arrived, he found men gathered in the men’s shelter.  He put his fish down and asked for an axe from his friend.

Without his knowledge, a dog came and ate all his fish. 

Oh! My fish, my fish,” he cried out.  “This is the only relish I have. You will give me my fish.  Give me my fish right now,” he demanded

The men said, “It’s not possible for us to find your fish right now. Just catch that same dog!”  

Chomba Nsangwa tied the dog up and started off for the next village.

“I have come to ask for an axe,” he told the men at the men’s shelter.  While he was speaking, a cow heard the dog barking persistently.  The cow rushed to where the dog was and gave it a hard kick on the nose. The dog died instantly.

The man exclaimed. “You have even killed my dog!  I will not even take your axe. Let me have my dog right now.  I want that same dog now.”

The people said, “It is not possible to find the same dog. Just give him the cow.” 

Indeed, Chomba Nsangwa got his cow and started to go to his hut.

Upon reaching his homestead, he chose a spot which had fresh green grass. There, he tied the cow to a stick and left it to graze.

Meanwhile, the chief was in the bush hunting with his gun.  He saw the cow grazing in the plain and, “My people, remain here, let me go and shoot that buffalo by the plain.” He moved slowly, aimed at the cow and shot it.

Chomba Nsangwa heard the gunshot. He came out of the hut and exclaimed “Oh! My cow! My cow! My cow!  Your honour, you will give me my cow and you will give it to me right now.  I want the same cow now!”

The chief said, “I didn’t know my friend. Let me just give you something else?” Chomba Nsangwa said, “No, I want my cow.”  The chief said, “Let me give you this village together with livestock and the people that are in it.” 

Then the man said, “That is good, your honour.”

The following morning, Chomba Nsangwa sent his people to kill a lion and instructed them to bring its skin to his palace.  The men did as they were told. They killed the lion and skinned it. The lion’s skin was brought to him.

Chomba Nsangwa gave the men further instructions. “Wrap a male goat in the skin and make sure that it looks exactly like a lion so that it can mate with the female goats properly.” They did as they were told.

After some days, some people visited him and upon seeing a ‘lion’ mating with the goats, they were shocked. They planned to go and tell their chief. When they went back, they reported to the chief what they had seen at Chomba Nsangwa’s village. “That man you have given the village  is using a lion to mate with goats!”

The Chief was incensed. “That slave cannot be more than me. Go into the forest and bring me a lion”.  People went into the forest, caught a lion and put it where the Chiefs’ goats were kept.  The goats made so much noise the whole night. The Chief said to himself, “The  lion is also mating with my goats too.”

In the morning, however, they found out that all the goats had been eaten.  The lion rushed out of the kraal and ran into the bush.  The Chief was furious.  He sent his people to arrest Chomba Nsangwa and bring him to the palace.

Meanwhile, Chomba Nsangwa was aware of the Chief’s plans. Secretly, a blacksmith had made him an iron mask which fitted his face and the whole of his head. He put it on. He then confided in one of his trusted people. He said to him, “When the case is over, I will rejoice.  When I become very happy, come and strike my head with a very sharp axe.”

The man agreed. “Yes, your honour.” 

When they arrived at the palace, the Chief told Chomba all that had happened and accused him of making the Chief lose all his goats. Chomba said, “No, your honour, had you asked me for the herbs, your goats would not have been eaten.”

The Chief said, “Alright my friend, go and lend me your male goat.”  Chomba said, “I will bring it, your honour, but before I go, let me celebrate.”

The Chief said, “do celebrate.” He told his people to chant his praises:

Chomba Nsangwa, Chomba Nsangwa, 
the one we strike with an axe on the head 
and he does not die!

They all chanted in his honour. As he was being praised, he performed his dance in celebration. A man came and struck an axe on his head. It had no effect on him. Chomba Nsangwa then said, “My people, we can go now.”

The Chief looked on with contempt. He said, “That one is just a slave.  He cannot be more than me.  Get an axe and strike me on the head too, I will not die.”  His people pleaded with him not to do it, “Your honour, you will die.”

“Just strike me!” insisted the Chief.

The people started shouting praises. “Chikolwa, chikolwa, chikolwa!”  One of them got an axe and struck him on his head. The Chief dropped dead. Chomba Nsangwa became the Chief of that village

The things we just see with our eyes can bring us problems.

And the tale has ended.
