Once upon a time, a certain young man lived in Kasempa Kingdom.  His name was Shi- Nkole. (Father of Nkole). Shi -Nkole was a renowned hunter of game animals. As such, his wife always cooked game meat for dinner. She never cooked ifisashi (vegetables prepared in pounded groundnut soup). People of Kasempa kingdom liked him very much because of his hunting skills. Indeed, as the Bemba saying goes, “to attract a fly, there needs to be a sore”. 

Amongst Kasempa villagers, there was an old woman whose name was nakulu Cilanshikita (grandmother of ‘it pains me’).  This old woman was very jealous of na Kasonde (mother of Kasonde), Shi -Nkole’s wife.  She had plans of giving Shi -Nkole her own daughter so that in return, Shi -Nkole would be bringing game meat to her home. However, she never told shi Nkole.

One day,nakulu Cilanshikita insulted na Kasonde without any provocation. As the Bemba saying goes, “the source of limping is in the part of the body that was hurt by kicking against the rock”.

One day, when Shi -Nkole came back from his hunting trip, he was gripped with a severe fever. He became so sick that in the evening, he died.This surprised everyone in the village. In fact, they were too shocked to mourn. All of Shi -Nkole’s relatives blamed his wife for his death, accusing her of bringing about his death by her “promiscuity”.

In the morning, elders prepared his body for burial. From his home, the funeral procession made its way to the graveyard where the body was to be interred. His wife cried uncontrollably and almost threw herself into the grave as if she would follow her husband. When the buiral rites were over, a group of villagers got hold of na Kasonde and started beating her up. As they did so, some women also teased her. “You thought you would continue eating boned meat forever? Let’s see if you will eat as you used to!”

The old women, nakulu Chilanshikita and nakulu Mwansa Chilopoli (grandmother of Mwansa Chilopoli) were the ones who tormented her the most.

That day, na Kasonde did not stay in the village. She spent the whole day in the bush. In the evening, na Kasonde went to her husband’s grave. As it became dark and lonely, she became afraid. Near her husband’s grave, there was a tree. For her own safety, she climbed up the tree and stayed there.  Certain things cannot be understood in this world. As she peered into the darkness, she saw a lion’s skin coming from the sky and falling on the grave of her dead husband with a thud! As a Bemba saying goes, “bad things happen one after the other.”

As she kept her eyes open like an animal, she saw something else falling from the sky, billowing smoke like an aeroplane that had been shot down. A big horn pierced the ground under the tree where she was. At the same time, there was brightness everywhere. She then saw ten winnows with two people in each one. These winnows were suspended in the air like helicopters.

When they landed, they started beating the drums which were heard only by them. Unaware of this ceremony, the village slept quietly. Dressed with feathers on their heads and leopard skins around their waists, they danced and danced to their hearts’ content.

Na kasonde gazed at this scene in horror. She peered closely and to her surprise, recognized one of the dancers. It was nakulu Cilanshikita! In disbelief, she turned her gaze to other dancers and recognized another as nakulu Mwansa Chilopoli.

She now realised that these people were witches. Nakulu Cilanshikita got the horn and pierced it on the grave.  It went inside. Then nakulu Mwansa Chilopoli got a stick and struck the grave.

After the grave opened, she got some brown soil and some powder that looked like pounded groundnuts. She sprinkled this inside the grave and the coffin came out. Shi Nkole got out of the coffin and stood upright like a well-disciplined soldier.

Nakulu cilanshikita got a rod and started striking his stomach while talking, using a demonic language. She turned to a man who was very tall and said, “bushe iyinengo tuinenengezye …?”  (Meaning, “are we going to eat this child today?”) The tall man answered. “Awe tuma menenengezye ivinakonokapo”, (meaning, we shall eat him tomorrow).

Then nakulu Chilanshikita continued talking to Shi -Nkole saying, “we are not being unfair to you.  We killed you because you used to boast whenever you killed animals which you ate with your wife na Kasonde. The next person to die will be your wife.”

She continued, “we have come here to eat your liver, heart and body. Don’t you see the people that die in this village?” Just then, Kanga amabu ala ikulanya (the person who is in charge of roasting liver) disagreed. He said, “Even if we want to eat this person, we will just invite problems and hatred from our friends.”

Everyone listened to him because they knew that Chikasha was a very difficult person. They pierced the horn in the ground, pulled it out and buried shi Kasonde again. They left the grave the way they had found it. Without wasting time, na Kasonde went to the village after the witches had gone back to their villages. As it was early in the morning, she ran back to the village. She went straight to the palace and explained everything that she had seen to the chief. The chief cautioned her to keep the secret so that the accused should not know that he was aware of what they had done.

In the evening, people in the village went out secretly and hid near shi Nkole’s grave.

After a short period of time, the witches and wizards arrived with clay pots in which they intended to cook the liver. Immediately they arrived, they struck shi Nkole’s grave. He came out without any resistance.They again told him about his death, saying that he had not been unfairly treated. He had died because he had been a successful hunter.

Just as Nandu Mutebeto got a knife to kill him, all the men came out of hiding, surrounded the witches and wizards and caught all of them. Shi Nkole was not talking because he had been turned into a fool.

The chief then told the witches and wizards that they could live on condition that they would bring shi Nkole back to life, or else they would see what was in store for them  

The witches and wizards agreed promptly that they would bring shi Nkole back to life. Feeling frightened, they got the charms and smeared them on shi Nkole who became a normal human being again.  

The chief angrily wagged his finger at them and told them that for what they had done, they were all condemned to death. He had their heads cut off before they were all burnt in a kiln.

 The tale has ended
