Once upon a time, a certain area was faced with hunger and starvation. People in this area did not have food at all. One day, a certain man got married to a woman in the village in the same area. As he could not bear the hunger and starvation any longer, he said to his wife, “My wife, since we are experiencing extreme hunger, let me remove one of your eyes.”

“Why should you remove my eye?” his wife asked with surprise. “We shall go and plant this eye in the bush, so that it can bear fruit,” he replied.  The wife agreed and so her eye was removed. Later, they both went and planted the eye in the bush where it started germinating. The eye grew and grew until it started flowering. 

It did not take long before it started to bear fruit. The eye had indeed produced fruit!

Unaware that the eye was ready, she asked her husband, “Can we go and check on the eye? and see if it has started bearing fruit?” He said, “as the owner of the eye, it would be too emotional for you to see your own eye? “Let me go and check on it myself.” When he reached where they had planted the eye, he found out that it was ready with ripe amasuku (ripe, juicy fruits). He started singing a song.

The eye of my wife, drop amasuku,
Drop and I will pick you up.
Like you always drop, drop amasuku,
Drop and I will pick you up.

As he sang the song, the eye swayed from side to side and back and forth. It dropped many amasuku beneath it. As soon as it had stopped dropping the fruit, the husband collected a basketful of amasuku. Afterwards, he sat down under the eye to feast on the remainders. He decided that he would not take any amasuku home since his family would become aware that the tree was now ready and the fruits were ripe.

He then gathered the remaining  amasuku in the basket which he put under the tree. Then he passed through the bush to pick some mushrooms for his wife to cook that night.

“My husband, where you go, has the Eye not started producing fruit?” the wife asked.

“No, that is when it has started flowering.” He answered.

When he reached home, he gave his wife the mushrooms which she cooked for dinner.  From then onwards, the husband would go to eat fruit from the Eye whenever he felt hungry. Each time, he would bring mushrooms for his wife.

One day, his wife was forced to ask again. “My husband,” she began, “my friends tell me that their eyes are ripe and they have started eating the fruit. What is happening where you go? Is our eye not yet ready? Each time I suggest that we go together, you always say that I will be emotional when I see my eye.”

The husband said, “No, it is not yet ready. The last time I was there, it had just started flowering.” And so, the wife and her son would eat the mushrooms each time he came back from the bush.

One day, her son said, “Mum, next time Dad goes out, I will follow him to see where he goes. I think that the eye is ripe. Tomorrow, when Dad wakes up to go to the bush, you should wake me up too.”

Early the next morning, the father whispered to his wife “I am now going! If I do not go into the bush early, I won’t find the mushrooms. They will all be finished.”
 
“OK, you go” his wife replied.

In the meantime, the wife alerted her son, who woke up instantly. His father started off to go into the bush. He walked briskily, watching over his shoulder to make sure that no one was following him. Each time he looked over his shoulder, his son would duck into a nearby shrub or tree. When his father went round a curve, he said to himself, “I will also turn right there”.

After a long walk, his father finally reached the Eye. The child stopped a safe distance from where his father was. Sitting underneath a tree, he was able to see his father. To his surprise, he heard his father break into a song.

The eye of my wife, drop amasuku,
Drop and I will pick you up.
Like you always drop, drop amasuku,
Drop and I will pick you up.

As usual, the Eye dropped amasuku all around it. Piles and piles of the fruit were dropped. His father filled up a basketful of them and sat down beneath the tree to eat the remainder. Once he was satisfied, he hid the remaining fruit in a shrub underneath the tree. Then he carried the empty basket and passed through the bush to pick up mushrooms for his family.


The child was shocked. “So this is what Dad does? The eye is ripe. It has been ripe and yet we, Mum and I, have been spending nights without food! He got the eye from Mum but he has been eating off it alone! Today, I will take the amasuku that he has hidden there and I will take it home,” the child said in disbelief.

After his father was out of earshot, he picked up the hidden eye. He helped himself to as much eye fruit as he could. When he could not eat any more, he packed the remainder and took it to his mother so that she too, would eat it and prove that the eye was indeed ripe.The child went back along the same path that he had come and took the eye straight to his mother.
 
“Mother, look, the eye is ripe, It has been ripe all along!” He said excitedly.

“So that is why your father has been gaining weight while we have been losing it?” his mother said in disbelief.

“Mum, the eye is already ripe and it is about to finish. Only a few bunches of fruit remain.”

The mother then said, “My child, let us go before he comes back, because when he comes and discovers that the eye which he had hidden has been eaten, he will go and  prune the whole tree.”

Carrying baskets with them, they both went back into the bush to collect the eye.

When they arrived there, the child said, “Let me sing the song Dad was singing.”

The eye of my wife, drop amasuku,
Drop and I will pick you up.
Like you always drop, drop amasuku,
Drop and I will pick you up.

As before, the eye shook from side to side and back and forth. Amasuku fell repeatedly until there were piles and piles of them beneath it. His mother picked several basketsful of the fruits. She reminded her son not to leave any fruit on the eye. And so he kept on singing the song until the eye was pruned of its fruits.  

They packed the fruit in the baskets and safely hid the baskets that they were not able to carry, saying that they would come back later in the afternoon to fetch them when the father was out of the homestead. They would dig a hole and hide the eye in it. On the way home, they decided to use the path along the river so that the father would think that they had gone to the river.

 At the river, they washed themselves and some of the clothes they had carried. When they were done, they went home. Upon seeing them, the father started shouting at them. “You, mother to my child, I came back a long time ago, where did you go today, because you do not usually go out?”“I  went to the river to watch the people who were catching fish,” she said.  

“Do we have fish here that people can get from the river when there is hunger? There is no fish,” he retorted.

 “There were some people who had come with fishing nets claiming that they would replenish the fish in the river,” she answered.

Then he asked her to cook the few mushrooms that he had brought back from the bush. “Aaha, we shall cook it, we are also tired, that is why we are sitting like this, and we would like some fresh air,” his wife answered, paying little attention to him.

In the evening she took the mushrooms and started preparing them. When the mushrooms were ready, she served him generously and left only a little bit of it to share between her son and herself.

“You have given me plenty of mushrooms today, yet it is you who should be hungry. As for me, I usually cook some of the mushrooms while in the bush to give me strength, that’s when I come back home” the husband said.

The wife replied, “No, you can also have enough to eat today.” 

As night fell, they went to bed. However, very early the  following day, he went out and headed straight for the bush. As he walked along the winding path, he thought to himself, “My wife and son will grow thinner and thinner while I continue to gain weight. I will even get married so that I can share the eye with my new wife.”  Upon reaching the tree, he was dumbfounded. “Who could have come here?” To his knowledge, no one ever knew about the eye. “Now there was not one piece of fruit remaining on the eye!” He lamented. Streams of thoughts were running through his mind

“Let me find what I had hidden in the shrub,” he thought. To his surprise, even those pieces of fruit were gone! “This is strange. Usually, whenever I leave the eye, I usually find it intact each time I come back for it! Now everything is gone! Whoever passed here must be a terrible person.”  He picked up his basket and started gathering the mushroom. He tried to gather as many as he could but he was too hungry to continue. He rushed home and asked his wife to prepare the mushrooms quickly.

“My wife, cook, I am dying of hunger. In the bush, I did not cook anything today. You know the eye had started bearing fruits but I think some dishonest people went there to harvest it before the fruit were ripe. There is not a single piece of fruit on the eye,” he informed his wife.

However, his wife feigned surprise. “Father to my child, you always told us that the eye did not bear any fruit, and that it had not flowered yet”.

“No, mother to my child,” he protested. “It flowered and bore some fruits; I even ate two of them.”

“But you were denying that the eye was ready!” she insisted.

Suddenly he asked. “Are the mushrooms not yet ready?”
 
I will serve you soon,” she answered. When the mushrooms were served, he ate them eagerly, with passion.

Now each time the husband brought the mushrooms home, the wife would not pay particular attention to them. This made him wonder. “My wife, what is happening to you nowadays? It must have been you who went to get the eye and got everything. I am the one who usually brought food home and you would just eat mushrooms, but nowadays, this is not the case.”

“No we have not harvested any eye at all,” she protested her innocence.

This did not satisfy the husband. He seized her and started beating her.

The child ran to the Chief. “My Mum has been beaten terribly by my father because of the eye he got from her. My father had planted the eye in the bush but after it had ripened he was eating it alone. Recently, he discovered that there was no fruit on the tree!” he said breathlessly.

“There is nothing?” The Chief asked. 

“No, nothing,” he answered.  

“So this man has been getting fed with food alone when there is hunger and starvation in my chiefdom? And he could not bring me anything? Messengers, go and apprehend him,” the Chief ordered.

Both the husband and the wife were apprehended and brought before the Chief. They were put in a traditional court where he asked them to explain what had happened.

“I plucked an eye from my wife which I planted in the bush. The eye started growing until it was able to bear fruit. My wife repeatedly asked me to take the eye home so that they could also eat it, but I said it was not ready.”

At that moment, his son chipped in. “The eye was actually ripe, I myself found Dad eating from the tree while singing. It is my Dad who has finished the eye by himself.”  

After they had explained what had happened, the Chief got the eye and the tree. Then he pronounced his verdict. “In future, when the tree bears fruit, I will be sending messengers to go and get the fruit. I will share this fruit with your wife. As for you, you will never eat from it. This marriage is also dissolved.”

The tale has ended
