Once upon a time,  Hyena and Hare were good friends.  Their friendship was so deep that they resorted to calling each other ‘uncle’ or ‘nephew’ wherever they went.

One day, Hyena decided to get married. And so, he went to another village to look for a girl to whom he could become engaged. In that village, he saw a very beautiful girl. She was of such great beauty that whenever one looked at her, she seemed to glow. The necklaces she wore accentuated her beauty.  Luckily,  Hyena became engaged to the girl.

When he went back to his village, he told Hare everything about the beautiful girl he had ‘married’.  In his heart, Hare wondered,  “How can Hyena marry before I do?  I will make sure I follow him and see how beautiful this girl is.”

The following day, they left for the same village. On the way, Hare ran faster than Hyena and arrived first.  He saw a very beautiful girl at a distance.  He asked, “Who is that girl radiating beauty?”

“It is Hyena’s wife. He married her yesterday,” the people answered him. Hare said, “Ah! Ah! How can Hyena marry such a beautiful girl?  He married her for me because he is my servant and he carries me on his back every day.  Even now, I have left him just near the village. You will see him when I leave.”

As soon as Hare left, Hyena arrived in the village. When he tried to go to his fiancee, she looked at him with contempt and said, “I didn’t know that you are Hare’s servant! You even carry him on your back. I would rather get married to Hare himself.” The girl went back to her parents.

The Hyena, seething with anger cried, “uwiii!” He was so angry that one could see steam coming out of his nostrils. He went back to his village where he left Kalulu.

Hare had a premonition of what was going to happen and so, when he saw Hyena, he pretended to be very sick and started groaning with pain saying, “Uhuu, I am dying, I am dying! Grandfather eee!”

When Hyena arrived he said to Hare, “You are my enemy! You are even groaning in pain, feigning illness! Why did you lie that it is I who carries you on my back?  You know that’s not true!”  Hyena continued angrily, “Come on let’s go!”

Hare said meekly, “Grandfather, I am too weak to go to the village. Had I enough energy, I could have gone to deny all these falsehoods on my own.  If there is anyone to carry me, I have no problem going with you so that I can clear my name. People have no compassion, how can they say this about me? ” He continued groaning, “Ah, I am dying!”

Hyena said angrily, “Come on. Get up and come with me to the village!”   Hare got a stick and started walking slowly.  Because Hyena wanted to reach the village quickly, he told Hare,” jump on my back.”

When they were near the village, Hyena said to Hare, “Get down and walk on your own. You will limp along.” Hare said, “You are just cheating yourself.”  He got a pole and struck Hyena on the head.

Hyena cried, “uwiii!” He ran across the village while people chased him away  shouting, “It is true that you carry Hare on your back!” Hyena ran very fast and disappeared into the bush.

Hare jumped out of the traditional storage house and said, “Have you seen what I was telling you?  Was I telling you lies about Hyena carrying me on his back?”  

That is how Hyena is.  He is my servant and he carries me on his back every day.” 

Hare married that girl and became very happy. From that time on, Hyena is not seen during the day because he feels shy.  But at night, he becomes very happy and laughs, saying, “Hare has got my wife.”

Respectfully, that is how it happened. (What happened) shouldn't be done
