Lying Is A Taboo (English)
Once upon a time, a certain young man came from a chiefdom with the intention of  marrying  from  Chief Kasoma’s chiefdom. After  he had married, his wife cautioned him, “my husband, here people do not tell lies. Once it is known that you are telling lies, that will be the day you will die.”

“Are you sure, my wife?” her husband asked with surprise. 

“Yes, no one tells lies here,” she confirmed. 

The young man was troubled. However, the couple lived together for some time until the young man decided to go and consult his father about the situation in Kasoma’s chiefdom.  

The young man started off to his  father’s village. Upon arrival, he greeted his father and narrated the story of the taboo in Kasoma’s chiefdom. “Father,” he began, “In Kasoma’s chiefdom, it is a taboo to tell lies. Once you tell lies, that’s the day you die.”

The father replied, “Ooho, so that is the way it is?” 

“Yes, there, no one tells lies.” 

“If that is the case, my son, then, here is a fishing net. This fishing net that I have given you should not be cast in the river. However, you should cast it on the highland where you normally go to plough the fields. You should just observe what   happens.”

The young man spent a night at his father’s homestead. The following day he went back to his wife. 

“Aaha, you have come with a fishing net?” she asked joyfully.   

“Yes.” he answered.   

“It is good, my husband. At least, we will be eating some relish (fish)” she said. 

For two days, the young man did not do anything with the net. However, on the third day, he decided to go to the highlands.  

“My wife, I am going to set the fishing net,” he said.   

Without paddles, he went in the direction of the highlands. Once he was there, he cast his net. 

The following morning, he said to his wife, “Let us go and collect the fish from the net.”

“My husband, the net that you took to the highlands, is that where we should go ?”she asked mockingly. 

“My dear, let us just go” he said persuasively. 

With a little more persuasion, he managed to convince her to go with him to harvest the fish in the fields in the highlands. When they reached the fields, they found out that there was a lot of water with a heavy current flowing through the fields. There were also plenty of  fish  in the net. There were breams, tiger fish and other assorted fish species. 

The wife was surprised beyond words. She thought to herself, “Uunhu, this person, is this where fish should be found? Are we at the river or in the bush? We do not have a river in this area!”  

To her surprise, when she closed her eyes and opened them fully, there  were fields of cassava as far as the eye could see.The young man got the fishing net, removed all the fish and left the net to dry on top of the cassava mound. They started off for home. “We shall come and cast the net two days from now,” he said to his wife. The young woman’s mind was not at ease.  

As she sat alone, she would often reflect on the whole experience, “Uunhu, am I asleep and dreaming? But I am not asleep and here we are eating  fish!”   

On the third day, the husband said to her: “My friend, I am going to set the fishing net.” 

“You are going to set the net again?” she asked with surprise.

“Yes!” he answered firmly.   The young man went to the bush, set the net and came back.   

“Welcome back!” she greeted him    

“Thank you,” he answered.   

She gave him water to wash  his hands and prepared food for him to eat.

That  night, they slept. The following morning, he invited his wife, saying, “My friend, let us go and harvest the fish in the net!” 

“Oh no, today I am not going there,” she protested. “Please take your brother-in-law.”

With his brother- in-law in tow, they left for the fields.  

When they reached the spot where the net was cast, they found plenty of water. There were also plenty of fish in the net, with some struggling to release themselves. 

The brother-in-law watched all this in disbelief. He said to himself, “No, this is not possible, I am going to tell my father. What kind of a person is this? This is the bush!”  

They collected the fish and put the nets on to the cassava mounds to dry. Then they went back home.

Typical of young boys who do not keep anything that they find troubling to themselves, he rushed to tell his friends about his brother- in-law.  “My friends, my brother-in-law does not cast his fishing nets  in the river! He casts them in the bush, in the highlands. And he catches a lot of fish!” 

“Wow!” his friends exclaimed. ”Let us go and ask your brother-in-law whether it is true he sets his fishing net in the bush!”

They all rushed to his brother- in-law’s place to  confirm what they had heard from the boy. However, the boy’s sister was not aware of this. “My brother-in-law,” he began, “was it not in the highlands where we went to get fish from the fishing nets?” “Uhm. You!” his brother- in- law expressed shock. “Here in your chiefdom, it is a taboo to tell a lie. That was what your sister told me. Let us go to the palace.”

They took the boy to the palace where justice was administered to him. Breaking the taboo was punishable by death.

Afterwards, the young man decided to go back to his father’s homestead.  

Respectfully, the tale has ended.
