The Calabash Of Beer
Once upon a time, a Chief in a certain village  offered his daughter as a prize. He announced to all eligible suitors that whoever wanted to marry his daughter should first finish a calabash of beer.

Several young men in the village who considered themselves as real drinkers made an attempt at the calabash of beer. However, each time any one of them took the first sip of the traditional brew, he became intoxicated. He could not even attempt a second sip as he would be too weak to do so.  One by one, the young men would try but each attempt ended in failure.

“The beer that is at the Chief’s palace is so strong. You have to be serious,” they would say.

The other young men who were yet to drink from the calabash would scoff at their friends and taunt. “You are weak drinkers.” However, when their turn came, they too ended up the same way as their counterparts who had failed the Chief’s challenge.  

One day, Hare came to the village to try his luck.   He said to himself: “Aha, so this is where they talk of a woman to marry? A Chief’s daughter by the name of Bwalya?”  By all standards, Bwalya was a very beautiful girl indeed. 

Hare plucked up courage and went to the palace.   The Chief’s messengers were the first to meet him.  “What do you want ?” they enquired.

“The reason I have come here is to marry the Chief’s daughter.”  

“You!   There are many young men who have failed. And you think you can marry the Chief's daughter?” the messengers said sarcastically. 

“Yes! Myself, I will marry her today, or even tomorrow. That is my goal.  I am Hare, “the one who does not drink less”  Hare bragged.

“Aaha, take him to the Chief.” The messengers laughed at  Hare.  They took  him to the Chief and announced their arrival. 

“Odini.” 

“Come in, sir.” The Chief invited them in.  

“Uuh ah,” the messenger cleared his voice, “Your honour, I have brought this little one so that he can attempt to marry your daughter.” 

“This useless one!” The Chief looked at Hare disdainfully.

“Yes, this same useless one. I also told him the same thing,”  the messenger replied.

Hare said, “I am not useless, your honour.  They say that “the one you despise will end up marrying your mother.” 

The Chief was infuriated. Nevertheless, he asked for beer to be brought as  was the practice.  The beer was taken to the shelter where they were sitting. Then water was added to it. 

Hare said, “That’s not the way I drink beer. It is too early for me to start drinking. I will come tomorrow.”  

Hare went back to his home village. On his way, he called all his fellow hare friends. When they were all gathered, he said, “Friends, I have been invited for a feast at the Chief's palace and I am inviting you to come with me. However, we cannot all go at the same time but we must go there one by one so that we can finish the beer that will be in the calabash, I have seen the calabash, it is quite big.”

Hare made this agreement with about twenty other hares.  Night fell and they slept. Early in the morning of the following day, around 6 am, Hare arrived at the palace.  

“Odini, I have come to fulfill the agreement we made. I want to finish the beer early so that I can have a wife.” 

The Chief looked at the mischievous Hare and issued an order.  “Messenger, bring the beer!” 

The messenger brought the beer and prepared a fire to heat the water.  When the water was boiled they added some hot water to the beer. The beer began to froth.  Hare took two long sips through a straw, and then commented that he would finish all the beer. “With due respect your honour, please excuse me I would  like to go and pass water outside.”

When Hare went to pass water, he reached the spot where his  friends were sitting. He told one of them to go and drink from the calabash.  That Hare took a long sip which knocked him flat. When he went to pass water and signalled to the next hare, he did not return to the palace as he was too drunk to walk.  

Another hare went into the palace. As he entered, he muttered to himself, “I cannot fail to finish this beer.” He did not even pay homage to the Chief.

The Chief said, “ Ah ah, Hare is getting drunk, he cannot even recognise my presence.”  Unknown to him, this was not  the “original” Hare. Through the straw he also had three long sips. “Yaah! Please let me first go and throw water outside, this beer uunhu!”  Hare said.   

Reaching the friends, he told another one to go to the palace. He became completely drunk. All twenty hares drank the beer and finished it. Only the residue remained at the bottom of the calabash. By this time, the first hare who had started drinking the beer had sobered down. He sauntered back to the palace and  demanded  for more beer, as the beer that was in the calabash was not strong enough to live up to the challenge.

The Chief said, “messenger check the calabash.”

The messenger looked into the calabash and found only the  dregs of the beer at the bottom of the calabash. 

Upon being told that the beer was finsished, the Chief presented the young lady to Hare as his wife. He called all the people to inform them that, from that day forward, the Chief’s daughter was now married to Hare! 

Respectfully, this is where the tale ended.
