Once upon a time, Kalyamisha had a feud with Nshitumpikwa.

Kalyamisha went to a neighbouring village in search of credit. Upon arrival in the next village, he asked his friends to lend him some money. A young man agreed to lend him ten pounds. Kalyamisha promised to return the money the following day. When Kalyamisha went back to his home village, he forgot about the promise he made to the young man who had lent him the money.

In due course, the young man decided to go and collect the money himself. When the young man reached Kalyamisha’s household, some people showed him an earthen mould. “The man you lent the money to died some time back,” they said.

“Is that so? Then it’s fine. I will just go back home,” the man said.

Kalyamisha went to another village and asked to borrow thirty pounds which he promised to return the following day. “My friend, please lend me the money. I will return it tomorrow,” he pleaded.

The friend obliged and gave him the money.

As before. Kalyamisha did not return the money.  After several weeks had elapsed, the young man decided to go and collect the money he had lent Kalyamisha. Upon arrival in the village he asked, “where is Kalyamisha's home?”   “Kalyamisha died some time back. There is the grave where he is buried,” the villagers answered him.

The young man looked closely at the epitaph. Indeed the words ‘Here lies Kalyamisha’ convinced him beyond any reasonable doubt that the report was true. “So this man has died?” he sympathised. “Then who is going to give me back my money?” he asked.

No one can give you back your money. He has no relatives. Even his wife has left to go and live among her relatives in another village,” they answered him. So the young man said it was fine and he left to go home.

For his next credit source, Kalyamisha went to Nshitumpikwa. “My friend, Nshitumpikwa, please lend me some money.”  “Are you sure you want to borrow my money?” Nshitumpikwa asked. “Yes I am sure,” said Kalyamisha.  “Here is the money. When are you going to return it? Nshitumpikwa asked. “The day after tomorrow, I will return it.” Nshitumpikwa replied.

So, Nshitumpikwa said, “that is fine with me.” He took the money and gave Kalyamisha. Kalyamisha promised he would bring the money back in two days’ time. A week passed, and then a month passed. It was several months later that Nshitumpikwa decided to go and collect his debt. “Let me go and collect my debt from Kalyamisha” he said to himself.  Just as he reached the edge of Kalyamisha’s village, some children ran and announced his arrival. “Mr Kalyamisha, the one from whom you had borrowed money,  Nshitumpikwa has come.”  Kalyamisha asked the villagers to bring a bark of a tree into his house. “Say that I am unwell,” he instructed them.

Nshitumpikwa arrived at Kalyamisha’s house where he found him being nursed. “What is the problem, my friend?” he asked with concern in his voice. “Your friend has been unwell; he is on the brink of death,” they told him. In the meantime, Kalyamisha began to groan, “Oh, Oh! I am dying, I don’t think I will survive, Eh, eh, Oh Oh…” he groaned.

Then the village elders said, “Nshitumpikwa, we suggest that you go back to your village to allow your friend to recover. Please come back another time!” they pleaded with him.

Nshitumpikwa said, “No, I can only leave when my friend dies. I love this man and I cannot just leave him like that, money is not important to me. When he dies, I would like to attend his burial.” 

In the evening, they announced, “ Kalyamisha has died.” “You can go to your home village now that your friend has finally died,” they pleaded with Nshitumpikwa. “I would like to attend his burial,” Nshitumpikwa repeated respectfully. People were now in a dilemma over what to do. They started wailing uncontrollably. “Oh mother! Oh mother! Kalyamisha  eeeh!  What are we going to do eeh!”

While this expression of sorrow was going on, Nshitumpikwa was patiently waiting for the burial. The following day, the people were still in a dilemma over what to do. “What are going to do? Let us find a coffin.” They started making a coffin.

After the coffin had been made, they again tried to persuade Nshitumpikwa to leave. “Look, we have made a coffin, please go, we are about to go and bury your friend.”   Nshitumpikwa replied, “I would also like to witness my friend’s burial. I cannot leave a friend who I loved so much.”

The people said, “this is difficult.” Soon, they realised that it would not be possible to get rid of Nshitumpikwa. They took Kalyamisha and put him in the coffin which they carried to the grave site. The grave was shallow and it was just meant to deceive Nshitumpikwa.

The coffin was placed in the grave but before the prayers could start, Kalyamisha asked, “Is our friend Nshitumpikwa present?”
Nshitumpikwa replied, “Yes, I am.”

He said, “you are Nshitumpikwa indeed! I am very surprised. There have been so many people whom I have swindled money from and once they were told that I had died, they always left without collecting their money, but not you! Indeed, I will pay back your money. Here is your money. Next time, I may go and borrow money from another person who will not easily be deceived, just like you.”

With due respect, that is how the tale was, that  is how the tale ended.
