What if we fail? David’s Family Problems Becoming a Disciple and making Disciples Our Criminal Evangelical Silence Youth Corner: Show it, don’t blow it! Marriage Corner: Abortion Crossword, Talktime with God ... and more

Here is a riddle. There`s something very valuable in it for you
It`s easy to do, but you cant undo it.
It looks fun, but its really dull.
The answer is in the story of what happened one day in the jungle.

THE GREAT WALL
The animals were very upset. Elephant trumpeted, Lion roared, Hyena howled, Snake hissed and Monkey chattered, because right through the jungle had appeared a Great Wall. So high that the top towered above Giraffe

So long that the sharpest eyes couldn't see the end of it. It was tremendously thick and terribly solid. "We're on the dry, dusty, desert side,"

"We're on the dry, dusty, desert side," rumbled Rhino, "the lake is on the other side."

"And the water lily pond and the trees and the shade," sighed Hippo. "Oh dear ..."

"And the grass," groaned Zebra. "And the coconuts," shouted Monkey. "Come on! Why doesn't somebody do something?"

Elephant flapped his huge ears and trumpeted, "What we need is a way THROUGH that wall."

"Of course," agreed Monkey, "A way through that wall - that's what we need. Come on, 'Hembo."

And all the animals shouted together, "Go on, Elephant! Go through that wall!"

"What you need is push," chattered Monkey.

Elephant's deep voice came down his trunk. "You're right. What a wall like this needs is strong shoulders like mine."

He took a deep breath and ...

Six tons' weight of Elephant battered up against the wall. WHOCK! WHOCK! Again the great shoulder thumped against the wall. WHOCK! Every bit of strength pounded into the next wallop. Ker-WHOCK! KER-WHOCK! KER! WHOCK!
"Through it! THROUGH IT! T H R O U G H!" urged the animals.
Elephant paused and looked at the blisters that had appeared on his shoulder.

"Push harder. Push harder!" yelled Monkey.

WELCOME
Dear Readers!
“Make disciples!”
Our human race still exists because there are people who have children and train them for life. Those grow up, also have children and train them. So one generation passes on the gift of life to the next, making sure that the children learn what they need to find their way and become responsible contributors to the society they are part of.

The same way of multiplying and ensuring the future has been given to the Church. The Lord Jesus called it “making disciples”. He told the men he had been training for three years to "go and make desciples of all nations" (Matthew 28,19). That’s how the Apostle Paul called and trained Timothy along with many other young men - and then expected them to do the same with yet others (2 Timothy 2,2). Older or more experienced Christians investing time and energy in the life of younger believers - this is God’s way of building the Church and making it unified, mature and resilient (Ephesians 4,11-16).

On the front page you see a photo of a young girl who already takes care of her younger sibblings. And you see a leader who shares time with a younger worker. This should encourage us to do what God has left us here on earth for - to invest our time in others, to bring them up, to make disciples!

Way forward
As slow as the work of making disciples goes in many of our churches, as slow has been the progress on “Natuleya!” during the past two years. Various factors have contributed to this. We now have shifted the production of the magazine to Luapula Province, closer to the bulk of churches who want to read it, and closer to the towns where we purchase our printing materials. With this ninth edition we hope to have returned to what we set out to be: a quarterly which will be read regularly by an ever increasing circle of readers. Please do pray for everyone involved in the various teams working in editorial, production, and sales, including the authors and translators. We all have a lot to learn, and we all have many competing commitments in other areas of life. We need God’s wisdom and energy for this work!

We found a nice little paper called SOON where you can read testimonies from people all over the world. We got a copy for each one of our readers, you’ll find it inside this magazine.


